Clarify async scenarios and deadlocks (#2112)
dotnet/docs-desktop: dotnet-desktop-guide/winforms/controls/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls.md

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls/cs/FormBackgroundWorker.cs" id="Background":::
:::code language="vb" source="snippets/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls/vb/FormBackgroundWorker.vb" id="Background":::

## Example: Use Control.InvokeAsync (.NET 9 and later)

Starting with .NET 9, Windows Forms includes the <xref:System.Windows.Forms.Control.InvokeAsync%2A> method, which provides async-friendly marshaling to the UI thread. This method is particularly useful for async event handlers and eliminates many common deadlock scenarios.

> [!NOTE]
> `Control.InvokeAsync` is only available in .NET 9 and later. It is not supported in .NET Framework.

### Understanding the difference: Invoke vs InvokeAsync

**Control.Invoke (Sending - Blocking):**

- Synchronously sends the delegate to the UI thread's message queue.
- The calling thread waits until the UI thread processes the delegate.

> - Can lead to UI freezes if overused during long-running operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Can lead to UI freezes, when the delegate, which was marshalled to the message queue, is itself waiting for a certain message to arrive (dead lock).
```

> - Useful when immediate results are needed from the UI thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Useful when already provided results are just needed to be picked-up from the UI thread (e.g. reading a control's property), or when a control does quickly need to be updated (updating just the Text properties of a handful of controls).
```

**Control.InvokeAsync (Posting - Non-blocking):**

- Asynchronously posts the delegate to the UI thread's message queue.

> - The calling thread doesn't wait and continues its work immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rather than waiting for the Invoke to return in a blocking way, the calling thread schedules just a call-back, but returns immediately. Although the code flow seems to be waiting at the `await` - the calling thread remains responsive at all times, and the code flow continues automatically through that internally scheduled callback mechanism.
```

- Returns a `Task` that can be awaited for completion.
- Ideal for async scenarios and prevents UI thread bottlenecks.

> 

Reviewer: - Can also be used _from_ the UI-Thread, when you want a Message to be completely finished, before you want to run a specific method.

Author: This is kind of implied with the first two points.

### Choosing the right InvokeAsync overload

`Control.InvokeAsync` provides four overloads for different scenarios:

| Overload                                                                             | Use Case                             | Example                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| [`InvokeAsync(Action)`][invoke_action]                                               | Sync operation, no return value.     | Update control properties.       |
| [`InvokeAsync<T>(Func<T>)`][invoke_func]                                             | Sync operation, with return value.   | Get control state.               |
| [`InvokeAsync(Func<CancellationToken, ValueTask>)`][invoke_func_value]               | Async operation, no return value.*   | Long-running UI updates.         |
| [`InvokeAsync<T>(Func<CancellationToken, ValueTask<T>>)`][invoke1_func_value_return] | Async operation, with return value.* | Async data fetching with result. |

> *Visual Basic doesn't support using awaiting a <xref:System.Threading.Tasks.ValueTask>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note that Visual Basic doesn't support the awaiting of asynchronous methods in methods which return <xref:System.Threading.Tasks.ValueTask>. In this case, please let your asynchronous methods return a Task and later wrap that Task in a ValueTask.
```

Author: @KlausLoeffelmann  Can you be clearer about this? How does someone do that? It just seems to me that it's impossible to use the two "async operation" from VB because it's expecting a `ValueTask`, right? I must be missing something in connecting the dots 😁

Reviewer: So, when we say, VB cannot use `ValueTask`, that is not correct.
Visual Basic is limited in that the compiler cannot create the necessary state machines needed for compiling `await`-s _in the context of_ `ValueTask`.

But it does not mean, you cannot _use_ `ValueTask` in VB.

The following code is a series of extension methods, which converts a Task (with our required signatures for `InvokeAsync`, except they are not returning a `_Value_Task`) into the equivalent ValueTask:

```VisualBasic
Imports System.Runtime.CompilerServices
Imports System.Threading

Module ValueTaskExtensions

    ''' <summary>
    '''  Converts a Func(Of Task) into a Func(Of ValueTask).
    ''' </summary>
    <Extension>
    Public Function AsValueTask(work As Func(Of Task)) As Func(Of ValueTask)
        Return Function()
                   Return New ValueTask(work())
               End Function
    End Function

    ''' <summary>
    '''  Converts a Func(Of Task(Of T)) into a Func(Of ValueTask(Of T)).
    ''' </summary>
    <Extension>
    Public Function AsValueTask(Of T)(work As Func(Of Task(Of T))) As Func(Of ValueTask(Of T))
        Return Function()
                   Return New ValueTask(Of T)(work())
               End Function
    End Function

    ''' <summary>
    '''  Converts a Func(Of CancellationToken, Task) into a Func(Of CancellationToken, ValueTask).
    ''' </summary>
    <Extension>
    Public Function AsValueTask(work As Func(Of CancellationToken, Task)) As Func(Of CancellationToken, ValueTask)
        Return Function(ct As CancellationToken)
                   Return New ValueTask(work(ct))
               End Function
    End Function

    ''' <summary>
    '''  Converts a Func(Of CancellationToken, Task(Of T)) into a Func(Of CancellationToken, ValueTask(Of T)).
    ''' </summary>
    <Extension>
    Public Function AsValueTask(Of T)(work As Func(Of CancellationToken, Task(Of T))) As Func(Of CancellationToken, ValueTask(Of T))
        Return Function(ct As CancellationToken)
                   Return New ValueTask(Of T)(work(ct))
               End Function
    End Function
End Module
```

Now, if you have that, you can craft your async method to use in InvokeAsync like this:

```VisualBasic
    Private Async Function UpdateUi(cancellation As CancellationToken) As Task(Of String)

        Dim pi = Await PiGenerator.CalculateDigitsOfPiAsync(
            existingResult:=String.Empty,
            digits:=20,
            cancellationToken:=cancellation)

        Label1.Text = pi
        Return pi

    End Function
```

And now you can use the extension methods like this, to convert your Task<T> into ValueTask<T>:

```VisualBasic
    Private Async Sub BtnCalcPi_Click(sender As Object, e As EventArgs) Handles _btnCalcPi.Click
        Dim panel = New AutoColumnTableLayoutPanel
        Me.Controls.Add(panel)

        Dim func = DirectCast(
            AddressOf UpdateUi,
            Func(Of CancellationToken, Task(Of String))).AsValueTask()

        Await InvokeAsync(func, cancellation)

    End Sub
```

The following example demonstrates using `InvokeAsync` to safely update controls from a background thread:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls/cs/InvokeAsyncExamples.cs" id="snippet_InvokeAsyncBasic":::
:::code language="vb" source="snippets/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls/vb/InvokeAsyncExamples.vb" id="snippet_InvokeAsyncBasic":::

For async operations that need to run on the UI thread, use the async overload:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls/cs/InvokeAsyncExamples.cs" id="snippet_InvokeAsyncAdvanced":::
:::code language="vb" source="snippets/how-to-make-thread-safe-calls/vb/InvokeAsyncExamples.vb" id="snippet_InvokeAsyncAdvanced":::

### Advantages of InvokeAsync

> `Control.InvokeAsync` has several advantages over the older `Control.Invoke` method. It returns a `Task` that you can await, making it work well with async and await code. It also prevents common deadlock problems that can happen when mixing async code with synchronous invoke calls. Unlike `Control.Invoke`, the `InvokeAsync` method doesn't block your background thread, so your app stays more responsive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Control.InvokeAsync` has several advantages over the older `Control.Invoke` method. It returns a `Task` that you can await, making it work well with async and await code. It also prevents common deadlock problems that can happen when mixing async code with synchronous invoke calls. Unlike `Control.Invoke`, the `InvokeAsync` method doesn't block the calling thread, which keeps your apps responsive and avoids hangs.
```
